---
layout: post
title: "Shame"
category:
tags: [javascript, c++]
---
{% include JB/setup %}

In 2012 I was writing mostly front-end JavaScript for a living.  I hated this
fact, because I didn't particularly like JavaScript, so I spent some of my free
time learning other languages and working outside of the browser.  One of these
languages was C++, specifically C++11, which I'd been told wasn't so terrible
anymore.  So I gave it a shot, and liked it.

After a long day shooting myself in the foot with the myriad loaded footguns
lying atop the JavaScript programmer's workbench, I retreated to a coffee shop
and started working again on my pet project — a simple ray tracer written in
C++11.  At some point I needed to limit a variable's scope and shorten its
lifetime.  I was familiar with [<abbr title="Resource Allocation Is
Initialization">RAII</abbr>][raii] but exhausted from a day of chasing bugs in
JavaScript programs, and I wrote something like this (C++ programmers with
sensitive stomachs may wish to look away):

```c++
([&b] () { // C++: A lambda expression that captures `b` by reference...
    Foo a; // `a` enters scope and is constructed
    a.stuff();
    b.whatever(a);
    // `a` falls out of scope and its destructor runs
})(); // ... and is immediately invoked
```

Grizzled veterans of JavaScript may recognize this as an [<abbr
title="Immediately-Invoked Function Expression">IIFE</abbr>][iife], a JavaScript
design pattern that exists to work around the language's crippled lexical
scoping and limit the adverse effects of variable hoisting:

```javascript
(function() { // JavaScript
    // `a` enters scope with a value of `undefined`
    var a = new Foo(); // a is assigned the value of `new Foo()`
    a.stuff();
    b.whatever(a);
    // `a` falls out of scope
})();
```

Careful readers will note that `a` comes into scope *before* the `var a = new
Foo();` statement, thanks to variable hoisting.  Oh, JavaScript, you sly devil.

Fortunately C++ has sensible lexical scoping; if you want to create a new
lexical scope, you simply create a new nested block.  After some sleep,
horrified by my creation, I replaced it with this C++:

```c++
{ // C++
    Foo a; // `a` enters scope and is constructed
    a.stuff();
    b.whatever(a);
    // `a` falls out of scope and its destructor runs
}
```

Much nicer, isn't it?  Don't turn green, JavaScript programmers, because you'll
have something like sane lexical scoping in ECMAScript 6:

```javascript
{ // JavaScript
    let a = new Foo(); // a enters scope, assigned `new Foo()`
    a.stuff();
    b.whatever(a);
    // `a` falls out of scope
}
```

[raii]: <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Resource_Acquisition_Is_Initialization>
[iife]: <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Immediately-invoked_function_expression>
